Insider threats are a huge concern in organizations as well.
These are people who have legitimate authorized access within
the company and use that insider access or knowledge to cause harm.
One interesting finding is that 40 percent of
insider threat breaches take over one year to detect.
This is usually because insiders are better at
covering their tracks and evading detection altogether,
and the longer the detection window,
generally, the more expensive the breach.
Now, let's walk through some common insider threat profiles.
First, we have criminal Christie,
who tends to be a financially motivated individual.
While companies typically try to hire good people,
some are down like criminals and steal from their employers.
However, it may not start that way;
situations change, people meet financial hardship and make bad choices.
Either way, internal employees can launch financially motivated crimes,
they can be damaging to companies.
Then we have oblivious Olga.
Ninety percent of breaches involve human error,
and people are still the easiest target for attackers.
People make mistakes, they leave computers unlocked and walk away,
they write their passwords down on sticky notes,
they click on fake money inheritance e-mails from Nigerian princes and much more.
I still remember one of my very first experiences with this kind of employee.
It was a month into my internship and I
was monitoring our network for any sensitive data like
credit card numbers or social security numbers that were being sent
out of our network because of course that should not be happening.
I came across this file one day that an employee was sending
from their work e-mail to their personal Yahoo account every month,
and it had all kinds of sensitive information in it that should not be sent in e-mail.
Any hacker that got their hands on this file would
have a field day launching easy attacks.
When I talked to the employee and investigated to learn more,
I found that they simply did not know the risks associated with their actions.
That's very common, and so these naive employees are a threat to watch out for.
Next, we have third-party Terry.
Insiders aren't just employees of the company,
many breaches stem from third-parties and contractors working with the company.
For example, in one of the most talked about data breaches of the century,
the target data breach in 2013,
it started when a third-party employee from
the company's air conditioning vendor clicked on
a phishing link that helped the attackers get from
the HVAC vendors network and eventually hop over the targets network.
Millions of records were lost and millions of dollars spent recovering.
That event shed light on how it's not
just your own employees that you need to worry about,
but the third parties matter as well.
This is also a case where while the insider did not have malicious intentions,
this mishap resulted in considerable damage to the company.
On to disgruntled Derrick.
This is the employee that didn't get the raise they
want or didn't get the performance review they wanted,
and now they're motivated by retaliation and revenge,
and so they sabotage or lash out against the company.
Finally, we have terminated Trevor.
Employees can pose a threat to companies after
they are gone if access is not properly removed.
Eighty percent of companies, say employees,
still have some form of access even after leaving the company.
This data can be sold or shared with competitors.
The bottom line is that insider threat motivations and
capabilities have some similarities with external attackers,
but there are also unique motivations.
They can also be harder to identify since these people tend to
have authorized access and internal knowledge of systems,
this is a critical threat to keep in mind.